Title: Occupying My Mind
Date: 2011-10-18 18:59
Author: lindsayrgwatt
Category: Uncategorized
Tags: Occupywallstreet, reform
Slug: 2632
Status: draft

Over the past few days I've found myself fascinated by the \#OccupyWallStreet movement. The fact that it has no real agenda other than reform feels powerful: how can you disagree with people who simply claim they want reform of a system that brought us the 2008 crisis?

No politician can claim otherwise and they've managed to make this an issue for the 2012 electoral cycle - all without issuing a single manifesto. In fact, the longer they can delay issuing a manifesto, the more powerful they get.

This lack of an agenda has forced me to think a lot about what reform really means and what the real problem is. Here's my thinking so far:

Most of us want to live in a capitalist world where we have the opportunity to improve our lot in life if we work hard, treat each others well and get a little bit lucky. Most of us want a world where our kids will have a higher standard of living than us and where the higher standard of living won't involve some sort of Faustian pact where cash is exchanged for the destruction of the environment.

So why do people feel that they can't get this?

First, capitalism as a game increasingly feels rigged for the existing players.

Wall Street exists to divert capital to the places where it can earn the highest return. It still does this, but through a perverse set of circumstances, those highest returns are now Wall Street itself.

I am no surprised at the behavior of any bankers: they're just selfish individuals maximizing their personal profit. I don't like the morality of a bunch of them but I definitely can't fault their logic.

So how come they're doing what

Not enough: short term thinking. Both for corporations and government.
