Title: Speculating On Where This All Goes
Date: 2023-07-24 21:29
Author: admin
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: 4544
Status: draft



I'm in tech and there is a lot of hype. Nary a month (day?) goes by without some breathless expression of "this changes everything," usually by someone talking their own book. It's easy to get jaded (I imagine if you were in the automotive industry about 100 years ago it was the same thing), but the last six months feel like we have really seen the emergence of two new foundational technologies.





I'm talking about ChatGPT and the Apple Vision Pro.





I've been in tech for almost 20 years now and I think I'm going to put ChatGPT and the Apple Vision Pro announcement up there with the iPhone launch as "this changes everything."





You should have a healthy skepticism of this: "this time it's different" are some of the most expensive and wrong words ever uttered.





But humor me and let me explain why and speculate on where this might all end up.





Let's start with ChatGPT and LLMs. I have friends outside of tech who say "it sucks" and think it is just used to write sloppy marketing content. A friend on Wall Street tells me that it is used to create the best possible birthday greeting for wives (I think this says more about Wall Street than the technology...).





The general perception for a lot of folks is "it's a really interesting toy."





Many of the most impactful technologies begin there. It's not a bad place to start - and LLMs are definitely more than a toy.





At our company, we have shipped a lot of machine learning over the years. It took years to figure out how to do this stuff. ChatGPT can do it better in seconds (fortunately ChatGPT is both expensive and rate limited for now and it's not the only thing we do, so we have time to adapt). Vast swathes of what used to require a PhD or similar to do are now accessible to the most junior programmer.





And it turns out that LLMs are really good at a lot of the banal things that humans do. For example, LLMs can read emails and extract salient content and draft a response. This is especially true when the emails are in narrow domains: if your inbox is full of receipts, an LLM could process them faster and more accurately than you could. I'm not making this up; we literally built an app and demo'd it at a recent trade show that did a similar variant of this. So a whole category of straightforward tasks can now be automated and people can be freed up to do more interesting work.





The last area I find fascinating is that folks are finding ways to have an LLM interact with your private data. For example, every company has multiple data repositories: wikis of information, PDFs of info, etc. Searching across them is a pain; even if you can connect them, how do you rank? The new solution: just give the LLM access to everything and then ask it questions. Early days still, but the results are really promising and it feels like the notion of a "personal assistant for everyone" is now feasible.





So, LLMs appear to be the real thing. What about this Vision Pro thing?





If you haven't yet watched the Visio Pro intro video, take 10 minutes and give it a watch:





<figure class=" is-type-video is-provider-youtube  wp-embed-aspect-16-9 wp-has-aspect-ratio">
<div class="">
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TX9qSaGXFyg
</div>
</figure>





Notice that this device is a gateway between the real world and the virtual; Apple calls it spatial computing. The hardware and software seem to be so well integrated that there is no break between the real and the virtual.





This leads to people who have tried the early demos coming away with [raving impressions](https://daringfireball.net/2023/06/first_impressions_of_vision_pro_and_visionos). It reminds of (spoiler alert) of the scene in [Contact](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Contact_(novel)) where the crew comes out of their capsule in a manic state and no one believes them. Such is the impression of folks who tried the Vision Pro.





Some of the themes that people harp on is the effect of using giant screens. You can just see/do more. Plus the fact that you 3 full dimensions of freedom means that you can "explore" for lack of a better term, rather than being constrained by a screen.





Don't scroll, just turn your head.





Okay, but what does this mean? How do we bring this all together?





<ul>



</p>

<li>

Discovery

</li>





<li>

Recall

</li>





<li>

Relations

</li>





<li>

Physical/virtual

</li>





<li>

Assistant

</li>



</ul>


